---
layout: post
title: "407 to Deep Water"
description: "Using inter-net"
category: Web
tags: [407, proxy authentication, torr, deep web]
---
Its very common when we switch to linux distros and feel trapped in multiple situations, one such situation is accessing internet behind a proxy network. If we wish only to use browser then "Networks" setting is sufficient to set proxy however the real pain is using the same in terminal (bash in my case). Adding to the pain is proxy authentication namely "ERROR:407" which needs username-password to use proxy server. And not to easy that pain using special characters like " ! @ # $ " in password.The solution to all that is very easy and require little patience.

##### Solution
* [apt][1] : **edit the file :/etc/apt/apt.conf**
  * Add line : Acquire::http::proxy "http://username:password@server:port"
  * Replace "http" to "https","ftp" as required
* [wget][2] : **edit the file :/etc/wgetrc**
  * Add line : http_proxy="http://username:password@server:port"

##### With special characters in password/username
* !(exclamation) : Use escape character before it "\"
* @,$ : Only string format tokens, use as it is
* (hash),~(tilde) : Play around, I am spoon feeding !

** Now you have your working internet connetion in terminal as well. So next question is what do we do with internet in terminal ? **

* Not all packages(analogically software in windows) are available to download in "<Distro> software center" which in my case is "Ubuntu software center".
* Direct access via regkey to "versin control" on "source code management" software
* Setup ssh, clone repo or config and use latest/beta/unstable releases .... (endless)

### Introducing TOR

#### What is Tor ?
     Tor was originally designed, implemented, and deployed as a third-generation onion routing project of the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory. It was originally developed with the U.S. Navy in mind, for the primary purpose of protecting government communications. Today, it is used every day for a wide variety of purposes by normal people, the military, journalists, law enforcement officers, activists, and many others. 
    Tor is a network of virtual tunnels that allows people and groups to improve their privacy and security on the Internet. It also enables software developers to create new communication tools with built-in privacy features. Tor provides the foundation for a range of applications that allow organizations and individuals to share information over public networks without compromising their privacy.

#### Why Tor ?
     Tor protects you by bouncing your communications around a distributed network of relays run by volunteers all around the world: it prevents somebody watching your Internet connection from learning what sites you visit, and it prevents the sites you visit from learning your physical location. Tor works with many of your existing applications, including web browsers, instant messaging clients, remote login, and other applications based on the TCP protocol.

#### How to setup Tor ?
  To setup Tor you follow below :
 * Download Tor Brownser Bundle from [Tor Browser Bundle][3]
 * When your download is complete open the location where you downloaded it. (Probable in /home/<username>/Downloads)
 * Unzip the file: right click on file -> Extract Here
 * Open the Extracted folder
 * In the Extracted folder you will see a file named start-tor-browser. Open that file by double clicking on it and say run and not run in Terminal
 * After that follow the steps as provided by tor

## OR
 * Goto Terminal and type " $ sudo apt-get install tor " and hit enter.

#### How to solve problems after "apt-get" or otherwise "libXXX" problems after opening 'start-tor-browser' ?

PS : The best idea is to google the error and read forums (which is what I did)

Common solutions :

* GPG error : Read few PPA forums with your particular error or otherwise try "sudo apt-key adv --keyserver keyserver.ubuntu.com --recv-keys 0x8420FEF1DD2B0027"
* missing libraries : Which ever libxxx is found missing, try " $ sudo apt-get install libxxx"(it works) on google the same libxxx for installation
* Vidalia error 127/126 : Do above two and follow with " $ sudo apt-get update " and when you run tor browser use "start-tor-browser --debug"(generally applicable in ubuntu)

### Now the cherry on the "Tor" cake is "The Deep Web (What I reffered to as Deep Water)"

**I suggest you to sign out all your personal accounts and exit any other browser before going ahead, just Tor browser is sufficient.**

Let us start with level, what are levels ?

There are, supposedly, 5 levels of the deep web (not counting Level 0). However, three more levels exist after the 5th one. This is yet to be proven, but all eight levels will be listed and described whatsoever.

The levels are supposed to be more and more difficult to access following their number; for example, only a simple proxy is needed to access Level 2, but complex hardware is apparently needed to access parts of Level 4, and all the following levels.The information contained in the deep web is likely to change following the levels: government secrets are contained in Level 5, while CP and snuff can be found in Levels 2, 3 and 4.

Just not to extend this post with the vastness of this topic I suggest you to read this [Deep Web][4]
If you are not sure you want to try this on your own but still want to see how it looks like then click [here][5] (Note: I take no responsibility of what you see here and you find it true or not But I can tell you I had been to Silk Road ! )

Enjoy !

[1]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Advanced_Packaging_Tool
[2]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wget
[3]: http://www.torproject.org.in/download/download-easy.html.en
[4]: http://quod.lib.umich.edu/cgi/t/text/text-idx?c=jep;view=text;rgn=main;idno=3336451.0007.104
[5]: http://www.businessinsider.com/tor-silk-road-deep-web-2013-3?op=1