---
layout: post
title: "Dynamic Sublists: GSoC 2015"
description: "A great project in Mailman community"
category: "GSoC"
tags: [Mailman,Dlist,GSOC]
---

##Introduction

Dynamic sublists or dlists is a feature that was added by Systers to Mailman
2.1.10, this feature aims to provide flexibility to list subscribers which is
discussed below in detail


## Need for such a feature

**Flexibility provided by dynamic lists to subscribers**

*Subscribe/Unsubcribe from new conversations*

List subscribers can decide whether to be a part of new conversations or not. If
the users decide to subscribe to new conversations, then they will receive all
the messages of a new conversation unless they explicitly unsubscribe from
it. If they otherwise decide to unsubscribe from new conversations,then they
will receive only the first message of every new conversation unless they
explicitly subscribe to it.


## Advantages:

  1. List Users depending upon the conversation can anytime opt to be a part of
     conversation or not.
  2. It prevents the inbox to get unnecessarily filled up with conversations
     that are of no interest.
  3. It prevents List Users to either switch over to Digest or worst Unsubscribe
     from the entire list if many uninteresting conversations start hitting
     their mailbox at some point of time.

##Workflow

**List Administrator and Dlists**

###Create a list as Dlist or Non-Dlist

While creating a list the List Administrator can choose to define a list as
either a Dlist or Non-Dlist (original Mailman list). To enable this we add
a new attribute in `MailingList` object as `dlist` which is `True` if the list
has Dlists enabled and `False` if not.

All USE CASES mentioned at [link][1]

## Architecture

###Message flow through mailman

Message moves from the IN queue to the `default-posting-chain`, to enable Dlist
a new rule `dlist` is added to this chain. The characteristics of this rule are:

  * If the mailing list is not dlist enabled, the rule misses

  * If the mailing list is dlist enabled and the address in the `To:` or
  `X-Original-To` header has the address of the form `listname+new@domain` or
  `listaname+new+subject@domain` then the message is accepted and is copied
  to the dlist-posting-pipeline (i.e. dlist queue).

  * If the mailing list is dlist-enabled and the address is not of the form
    specified in the above point, the message bouces back to the user.

Another important function of the dlist queue would be to calculate the thread
information to the `MailingList` metadata object, ofcourse if the message is fit
for posting to the list. If not appropriate errors are raised which are
mentioned below. Calculation of thread information means to add the thread_id to
the metadata if the message belongs to a previously created thread, or to create
a new thread and add its id.

Users can subscribe/unsubscribe from the particular conversation by sending
emails to `listname+threadname+(un)subscribe`.To process the email-commands for
subscribing/ubsubscribing to threads, we have two possible solutions. Either we
follow the current mechanism of processing the email-commands i.e. the
`administrivia` rule checks for the `-command` at the end and moves the message
to the hold queue where hold runner picks up the message and then again copies
the message to command queue. From here the command runner picks up every
message and takes the required action.

*Note*: In this case we may have some problem with two different delimiters i.e.
`-` and `+`, but on the plus side we get to reuse some of the existing code.

Or we could just do the check in the dlist rule and move the message to the
hold queue and the further action can be similar to those is the previous
paragraph.

After the messages are acccepted for posting from the `default-posting-chain`
the message is moved to `dlist-posting-pipeline` which is slighly different
from the `default-posting-pipeline` since it has to create different footers
with per-thread unsubscribe links.

Dlist-recipient handler calculates the list of the recipeients (replacing the
job of `calculate-recipients` handler)

###(Un)Subscribing to the threads

As mentioned above, the users can (un)subscribe to the threads by sending email
commands to the address `listname+thread+(un)subscribe@domain`. We could modify
`administrivia` rule to check for the above mentioned form and hold the
message. Then `hold` runner is modified to pick up the message and move it to
the `dlist` queue where the `dlist` runner takes the appropriate action. Dlist
runner calls the `dlist` handler (like `autorespond` handler in the command
runner)to process the message and sends the `autoreplies` to the `virgin` queue.

The subscription options can be changed by modifying the `overrirde` table which
keeps track of users' (un)subscription to each thread. The details are mentioned
below.

###Dlist Posting Pipeline

The handlers in this pipeline would be following.

  	- mime delete
  	- tagger
  	- dlist-recepients
  	- avoid duplicates
  	- cleanse
  	- cook headers
  	- subject-prefix
	- dlist-decorate
  	- RFC 2369
  	- to-archive
  	- to-digest
  	- to-unset
  	- after delivery
  	- acknowledge
  	- to-outgoing

####dlist-recipeints*

This is a simple handler like `calculate-recipients` and calculates which users
are subscribed to the list and the thread. If it is a new thread the message is
sent to all the subscribers, but if it is continuation of a previous thread it
is sent only to the subscribers who are either subscribed to all the messages or
who are unsubscribed from the messages after first post but have explicitly
subscribed to the thread. The `Override` model is used to check for explicit
subscriptions/unsubscriptions from a thread. The details about it are mentioned
below.



####dlist-decorate

Also, the footer would be different for the two set of recipeints mentiond above
and for that purpose decorate handler would be modified for the purpose. Or
again a new handler `dlist-decorate` could be created to modify the messages for
dlists.


*Note*: The implementation of dlists in mailman2.1 by systers uses a second
pipeline for dlists. But it might be possible that we could re-use the existing
`default-posting-pipeline` with a new `dlist-recipeints` handler. Or we could
just modify `calculate-recipients` handler to check for dlists and calculate the
recipeints like it is calculated in dlist-recipeints handler. Personally I would
like to have a seperate pipeline and handler to keep the whole process clean and
to reduce the errors caused by the checks (assuming the implementations of
theory is not always perfect), but I am open to the opinions from the mentors.


## Probable Implementation

These new models would be created:

```python
class Thread(model):
	"""This is base model for threads which stores the message id of the first
	post and in linked to the `Message` model using the `Message.thread_id`
	attribute
    """
    __tablename__ = 'thread'
	thread_id = Column(Integer, primary_key=True)
	thread_name = Column(Unicode)
	base_message_id = Column(Integer, ForeignKey('message.id'), index=True)
	messages = relationship('Message')

	def create_thread(self, msg, msgdata, thread_name):
		# Create new thread considerting the messsage as the first post
		# to the thread
		....

	def new_thread(self, msg, msgdata, thread_name=None):
		# Add relevant headers to create a thread and pass the params to
		# create_thread() method.
		....

	def continue_thread(self, msg, msgdata, thread_id):
		# Add an existing message to a thread.
		...


class DlistsPrefernce(Enum):
	# Recieve all posts in all thread and then explicitly unsubscribe to
	# a particular thread
	all_posts = 1
	# Receive first posts from each thread and explicitly subscribe to the
	# conversation
	first_posts = 2


class Override(model):
    """ This model overrides the default user preferences for subscription or
    unsubscription from a particular thread. By default all 'First' posts are
    received by all the users and if a user wishes to unsubscribe (assuming its
    his/her default status "Receive all mails") `Override` will store this
    change in preference and will unsubscribe the user. If current status is
    "Only receive first post" and user particularly wishes to subscribe to a
    thread then Override will store that prefrence and subscribe the user.
    """
	__tablename__ = 'override'
	member_id = Column(Integer, primary_key=True)
	member = relationship('Member')
	# Above could be user_id and user, but need to read more about difference
	# between user and subscriber class
	thread_id = Column(Integer, ForeignKey('thread.id'))
	thread = relationship('Thread')
	# These preferences are picked up from member's default preferences for
	# this list and are updated if user subscribes/unsubscribes from a thread
	preference = Column(Enum(DlistPreference))
```

Also, the following models needs to be modified to accomodate the changes for
dynamic sub-lists. Only the additional attributes of the models are mentioned.

```python
class Message(model):
    __tablename__ = 'override'
    thread_id = Column(Integer, ForeginKey('thread.id'))
	thread = relationship('Thread')
	subject = Column(Unicode())


class Preferences(model):
	# This is global preference for a particular user, and will be the default
	# for a user.
    dlist_preference = Column(Enum(DlistPreference))


class Member(model):
	# This is a per-list preference for a particular membership, it picks the
	# default from above preferences.
	dlist_preference = Column(Enum(DlistPreference))
```

##Errors

  * NewThreadError : When a user sends a email to the address
    `listname+new+threadname@domain` but a thread already exists with the same
    `threadname` this error is raised. Also, as a result of this error the email
    bounces back to the user asking him to either change the `threadname` or post
	to `listname+threadname@domain` if he meant to post to the existing thread.

  * NonExistentError: This error is raised when a user sends an email to
  `listname+threadname@domain` and no such `threadname` exists in the database.
  In this case too the email bounces back to the user with the appropriate reasons.

  * MalformedRequestError: Apart from the above two errors, it the commands
  are in any other format that is not supported this error is raised and again
  the email bounces back to the user.

## Postorius

This project would obviously follow by another small project (which I promise
to finish ASAP after the GSoC, as adding it to this very project would make it
impossible for me to finish it in this summer) which would involve providing
admins with options to create lists with dynamic sublists enabled or disabled.

I think adding the `dlist` flag (mentioned above) in the mailing_list
resource and adding th UI options would be enough to create a Dlist. And then it
would be followed by a new set of preferences in user's preferences page which
would enable him to set his dlist preferences.


## Timeline

The above projects can be divided into three major parts so as to concretely
define the schedule of this project.

  * Models
  * Rules
  * Handlers

All the changes described in the implementation part come under these
categories( and ofcourse wiring them together and throughout the mailman core).


* 27th Apr - 25th May (Community Bonding Period): This would mainly involve
fixing errors in the viability of this project. I will try building a proof of
concept set of rules/handlers/models which would at least enable finding out
errors in the above implementation at a very early stage.


* Week 1 : Adding all the left out parts of the models and their attributes.
  	   	   This would involve `Thread`, `Override` models and new methods in
		   `Member`, `MailingList` and other required models/

* Week 2 : Adding all the methods of the above mentioned models including
  	   	   `create_thread`, `continue_thread`. Adding some tests for these
		   models too.

* Week 3 : By the end of this week, all the utility functions to create and
           add threads would be completed. Also, the documentation and tests
		   for the same would be done.

* Week 4 : Send a pull request to simply group messages under threads. Even
  	   	   though this would not work obviously without rules to check for
  	   	   threadname, but a full features pull request with all tests passing
		   should be working by now.

* Week 5-6 : Create interfaces for rules, handlers, and dlist/command runner and
  	   	   	 add their implementations. Design decisions for creating new
  	   	   	 rules/handlers or adding to existing handlers.

* Week 7-8 : Adding all the code for the smooth flowing of the message from IN
  	   	   	 queue to OUT queue. Basis dlist functionality should be working by
			 the end of this week.

* Week 9-10 : Modify `Member` to enable the dlist_preferences for a user. Make
  	   		  the `Override` model functional so that users can subscribe and
			  unsubscribe. Also dlist-posting-pipeline should be working by now.

* Week 11-13 : Writing tests and documentation and solving problems from
               previous weeks.

[1]: http://wiki.mailman.psf.io/DEV/Dynamic%20Sublists
